README.md, before:

# Attendance Tracking System

## 📊 Overview

These materialized views are designed to provide both sales and operations teams with insights into member attendance patterns, enabling informed decision-making around selling new memberships and capacity expansion opportunities.

**Live Dashboard:** [View Attendance Dashboard](https://lockeroomgym.retool.com/embedded/public/c5016a63-5e65-4265-88bd-5fc97296761b)

---

## 🔄 How Data Flows

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Member Checks In] --> B[Daily Attendance Data]
    B --> C[Automatic Processing]
    C --> D[Daily View<br/>Individual Sessions]
    D --> E[Weekly View<br/>Aggregated Summary]
    E --> F[Retool Dashboard<br/>Business Insights]
    
    G[System Configuration<br/>Capacity Settings] --> C
    H[Gym Locations<br/>BLIGH, BRIDGE, COLLIN] --> C
    I[Class Types<br/>PERFORM, BOX, VO2, SQUAD] --> C
    
    style A fill:#e1f5ff
    style F fill:#d4edda
    style C fill:#fff3cd
    style E fill:#f8d7da
```

### Data Sources

1. **`member_daily_sessions_attended`**: Daily upload via CSV for the previous day's attendance data
2. **System Settings**: Capacity limits and calculation parameters are stored in configuration
3. **Gym Information**: Each class is automatically tagged with its location (BLIGH, BRIDGE, or COLLIN)
4. **Class Types**: Classes are categorized (PERFORM, BOX, VO2, SQUAD)

> **Note:** These views are materialized views, meaning the data is pre-computed and stored for fast querying. The views refresh automatically via a scheduled cron job. Data will not update until the refresh automation runs at the scheduled time (every Tuesday at 1:00 AM).

---

## 📈 Key Metrics Explained

### Daily View Columns (`view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu`)

#### `session_date`, `session_start`, `session_type`
- **Source:** `member_daily_sessions_attended` table
- **Description:** Date, time, and full name of the class session

#### `gym`
- **Source:** Auto-populated by trigger function from `session_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Gym location (BLIGH, BRIDGE, or COLLIN)
- **Extraction Logic:** Pattern matching on `session_name` for "BRIDGE"/"BRG", "BLIGH"/"BLH", "COLLIN"/"COL"

#### `class_type`
- **Source:** Auto-populated by trigger function from `session_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Class category (PERFORM, BOX, VO2, SQUAD)
- **Extraction Logic:** Pattern matching on `session_name` for class type keywords

#### `coaches`
- **Source:** Aggregated from `coach_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Comma-separated list of all coaches for the session
- **Calculation:** `STRING_AGG(DISTINCT coach_name, ', ' ORDER BY coach_name)`

#### `members_attended`
- **Source:** Aggregated from `member_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Comma-separated list of all members who attended
- **Calculation:** `STRING_AGG(DISTINCT member_name, ', ' ORDER BY member_name)`

#### `actual_attendance`
- **Source:** Counted from `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Total number of members who attended the session
- **Calculation:** `COUNT(*)` grouped by session

#### `class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** `system_config.capacity` table, joined on `match_pattern = class_type`
- **Description:** Base capacity per class type (e.g., PERFORM = 2)
- **Calculation:** `MAX(sc.capacity)::int` where `sc.match_pattern = class_type`

#### `class_instance_capacity`
- **Source:** Calculated from `class_type_capacity` and number of coaches
- **Description:** Total capacity for this specific session instance (base capacity × number of coaches)
- **Calculation:** `class_type_capacity × (number_of_coaches)`
- **Coach Count:** Derived from counting distinct coaches in the aggregated `coaches` string

#### `max_class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** `system_config` table columns `max_bligh`, `max_bridge`, or `max_collin`
- **Description:** Gym-specific maximum capacity for this class type
- **Calculation:** 
  ```sql
  CASE 
      WHEN gym = 'BLIGH' THEN max_bligh
      WHEN gym = 'BRIDGE' THEN max_bridge
      WHEN gym = 'COLLIN' THEN max_collin
      ELSE capacity
  END
  ```
- **Source Table:** `system_config` joined on `match_pattern = class_type`

---

### Weekly View Columns (`view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu`)

#### `week_start`
- **Source:** Calculated from `session_date` in daily view
- **Description:** First day (Monday) of the week
- **Calculation:** `DATE_TRUNC('week', session_date)::date`

#### `session_type`, `session_start`, `gym`, `class_type`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view
- **Description:** Same as daily view, aggregated at weekly level

#### `class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view (originally from `system_config.capacity`)
- **Description:** Base capacity per class type
- **Calculation:** `MAX(class_type_capacity)` from daily view

#### `class_instance_capacity`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view
- **Description:** Capacity for the session instance (base × coaches)
- **Calculation:** `MAX(class_instance_capacity)` from daily view

#### `max_class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view (originally from `system_config.max_bligh/bridge/collin`)
- **Description:** Gym-specific maximum capacity
- **Calculation:** `MAX(max_class_type_capacity)` from daily view

#### `total_capacity_for_week`
- **Source:** Calculated from `class_instance_capacity` and `operational_days`
- **Description:** Total number of spots available across all operational days in the week
- **Calculation:** `class_instance_capacity × operational_days`
- **Formula:** `MAX(class_instance_capacity) × COUNT(DISTINCT session_date)`

#### `average_spots`
- **Source:** Calculated from `total_capacity_for_week` and `operational_days`
- **Description:** Average number of spots available per operational day
- **Calculation:** `total_capacity_for_week ÷ operational_days`
- **Formula:** `(class_instance_capacity × operational_days) ÷ operational_days`
- **Simplified:** `class_instance_capacity` (since capacity is constant per day)

#### `operational_days`
- **Source:** Counted from `session_date` in daily view
- **Description:** Number of days the class ran during the week (Monday-Friday only)
- **Calculation:** `COUNT(DISTINCT session_date)` where `EXTRACT(DOW FROM session_date) BETWEEN 1 AND 5`
- **Filter:** Only includes weekdays (Monday = 1, Friday = 5)

#### `total_attendance_for_week`
- **Source:** Summed from `actual_attendance` in daily view
- **Description:** Total number of members who attended across all sessions in the week
- **Calculation:** `SUM(actual_attendance)` from daily view

#### `avg_attendance_per_session`
- **Source:** Calculated from `total_attendance_for_week` and session count
- **Description:** Average number of attendees per individual session
- **Calculation:** `AVG(actual_attendance)` from daily view
- **Alternative:** `total_attendance_for_week ÷ number_of_sessions`

#### `utilization_rate`
- **Source:** Calculated from `total_attendance_for_week` and `total_capacity_for_week`
- **Description:** Ratio of actual attendance to available capacity (decimal format, 0.0 = empty, 1.0 = full capacity, >1.0 = over capacity)
- **Calculation:** `total_attendance_for_week ÷ total_capacity_for_week`
- **Formula:** `SUM(actual_attendance) ÷ (class_instance_capacity × operational_days)`
- **Range:** 0.0 to 1.0+ (can exceed 1.0 if over capacity)

#### `sale_without_change`
- **Source:** Calculated using `lc_buffer` and `avg_perform_consumption` from `system_config`, plus `utilization_rate` and `average_spots`
- **Description:** Estimated number of additional members that could be added without changing the current capacity setup
- **Calculation:** `((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) ÷ avg_perform_consumption`
- **Formula Breakdown:**
  - `lc_buffer`: Sourced from `system_config.config_value` where `config_key = 'lc_buffer'` (typically 0.9)
  - `utilization_rate`: Calculated column (see above)
  - `average_spots`: Calculated column (see above)
  - `avg_perform_consumption`: Sourced from `system_config.config_value` where `config_key = 'avg_perform_consumption'` (typically 0.4)
- **Logic:** Calculates available capacity buffer (target utilization minus current utilization) multiplied by average spots, then divided by consumption rate
- **Can be negative:** If `utilization_rate > lc_buffer`, result will be negative (over capacity)

#### `sale_add_change`
- **Source:** Calculated from `sale_without_change` and `max_class_type_capacity`
- **Description:** Estimated number of additional members that could be added if capacity is increased to the gym-specific maximum
- **Calculation:** `sale_without_change + max_class_type_capacity`
- **Formula:** `((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) ÷ avg_perform_consumption + max_class_type_capacity`
- **Source Columns:**
  - `sale_without_change`: Calculated column (see above)
  - `max_class_type_capacity`: Passed from daily view (originally from `system_config.max_bligh/bridge/collin`)

---

## 🔧 Technical Documentation

### System Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Source Data"
        A[member_daily_sessions_attended<br/>Raw attendance records]
        B[system_config<br/>Capacity & settings]
    end
    
    subgraph "Automated Processing"
        C[Trigger Function<br/>set_gym_and_class_type]
        D[Daily Materialized View<br/>view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu]
        E[Weekly Materialized View<br/>view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu]
    end
    
    subgraph "Output"
        F[Retool Dashboard]
    end
    
    A -->|INSERT/UPDATE| C
    C -->|Auto-populates| A
    A -->|Source data| D
    B -->|Config values| D
    D -->|Aggregates| E
    E -->|Queries| F
    
    style C fill:#ffeb3b
    style D fill:#4caf50
    style E fill:#2196f3
```

### Database Tables

#### `member_daily_sessions_attended`
Primary source table containing individual attendance records.

**Key Columns:**
- `session_date` - Date of the class
- `session_start` - Class start time
- `session_name` - Full class name (e.g., "PERFORM - BRG AM")
- `member_name` - Name of attending member
- `coach_name` - Name of coach
- `gym` - Auto-populated: BLIGH, BRIDGE, or COLLIN
- `class_type` - Auto-populated: PERFORM, BOX, VO2, or SQUAD

#### `system_config`
Configuration table storing capacity limits and calculation parameters.

**Key Configuration Values:**
- `capacity` - Base capacity per class type (e.g., PERFORM = 2)
- `max_bligh`, `max_bridge`, `max_collin` - Maximum capacity per gym location
- `lc_buffer` - Load capacity buffer (0.9 = 90% target)
- `avg_perform_consumption` - Average consumption rate for calculations (0.4)

### Materialized Views

#### `view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu` (Daily Detail)
Pre-aggregated daily view showing each session with:
- Aggregated member and coach lists
- Actual attendance count
- Class type capacity (base capacity from config)
- Class instance capacity (base × number of coaches)
- Maximum class type capacity (gym-specific max)

**Refresh:** Daily (or on-demand)

#### `view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu` (Weekly Aggregate)
Weekly summary aggregating Monday-Friday sessions:

**Columns:**
- `week_start` - First day of the week
- `session_type` - Class name
- `session_start` - Class time
- `gym` - Location
- `class_type` - Category
- `class_type_capacity` - Base capacity
- `class_instance_capacity` - Capacity × coaches
- `max_class_type_capacity` - Gym-specific maximum
- `total_capacity_for_week` - Total spots available for the week
- `average_spots` - Average spots per day
- `operational_days` - Number of days class ran (Mon-Fri)
- `total_attendance_for_week` - Total members attended
- `avg_attendance_per_session` - Average per session
- `utilization_rate` - Ratio of attendance to capacity (0.0-1.0+)
- `sale_without_change` - `((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) / avg_perform_consumption`
- `sale_add_change` - `sale_without_change + max_class_type_capacity`

**Refresh:** Daily (or on-demand)

### Automated Functions

#### `set_gym_and_class_type()`
**Type:** Trigger Function (PL/pgSQL)  
**Trigger:** `trigger_set_gym_and_class_type`  
**When:** Before INSERT or UPDATE on `member_daily_sessions_attended`

**Purpose:** Automatically extracts gym location and class type from `session_name`:
- **Gym Detection:** Looks for "BRIDGE"/"BRG", "BLIGH"/"BLH", "COLLIN"/"COL"
- **Class Type Detection:** Looks for "PERFORM", "BOX", "VO2", "SQUAD"
- **Case Insensitive:** Handles variations in capitalization

**Example:**
- Input: `session_name = "PERFORM - BRG AM"`
- Output: `gym = "BRIDGE"`, `class_type = "PERFORM"`

#### `refresh_view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu()`
**Type:** Function  
**Purpose:** Refreshes the daily materialized view

#### `refresh_view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu()`
**Type:** Function  
**Purpose:** Refreshes the weekly materialized view

### Calculation Formulas

#### Utilization Rate
```
utilization_rate = total_attendance_for_week / total_capacity_for_week
```
- Range: 0.0 (empty) to 1.0+ (over capacity)
- Example: 15 attendees / 18 capacity = 0.833 (83.3% full)

#### Sale Without Change
```
sale_without_change = ((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) / avg_perform_consumption
```
- Shows how many more members can be added without changing capacity
- Uses buffer (0.9) as target utilization
- Example: ((0.9 - 0.833) × 6.0) / 0.4 = 1.0

#### Sale Add Change
```
sale_add_change = sale_without_change + max_class_type_capacity
```
- Shows potential if capacity is increased to maximum
- Example: 1.0 + 8 = 9.0

### Data Flow Details

1. **Data Entry**: Attendance records are inserted into `member_daily_sessions_attended`
2. **Auto-Enrichment**: Trigger function automatically populates `gym` and `class_type` columns
3. **Daily Aggregation**: Daily view groups sessions by date, time, and location
4. **Weekly Aggregation**: Weekly view aggregates Monday-Friday data by week
5. **Configuration Lookup**: Views join with `system_config` to get capacity settings
6. **Calculation**: All metrics are calculated in real-time during view refresh

### Refresh Schedule

**Automated:** Weekly on Tuesday at 1:00 AM
- Cron job name: `refresh_attendance_views_weekly`
- Refreshes both daily and weekly views automatically
- Can also be triggered manually via Retool

**Manual Refresh:**
```sql
SELECT refresh_view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu();
SELECT refresh_view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu();
```

### Indexes

**Daily View:**
- `idx_daily_attendance_date` on `session_date DESC`
- `idx_daily_attendance_composite` on `(session_date DESC, session_start, session_type)`

**Weekly View:**
- `idx_weekly_attendance_week_start` on `week_start DESC`
- `idx_weekly_attendance_session_type` on `session_type`
- `idx_weekly_attendance_composite` on `(week_start DESC, session_type, session_start)`

### Filtering Logic

**Weekly View Filter:**
- Only includes Monday-Friday: `EXTRACT(DOW FROM session_date) BETWEEN 1 AND 5`
- Groups by week using `DATE_TRUNC('week', session_date)`
- Currently filters for PERFORM classes only (can be expanded)

### Error Handling

- **Division by Zero**: All division operations check for zero denominators
- **NULL Values**: Config values are checked for NULL before use
- **Missing Data**: Views handle missing gym/class_type gracefully (returns NULL)

---

## 📝 Usage in Retool

### Primary Table Query
Use the weekly view as your main dashboard table:

```sql
SELECT 
    week_start,
    session_type,
    session_start,
    gym,
    class_type,
    utilization_rate,
    sale_without_change,
    sale_add_change
FROM view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu
ORDER BY week_start DESC, session_start;
```

### Drill-Down Query
When clicking a weekly row, show daily details:

```sql
SELECT 
    session_date,
    session_start,
    session_type,
    coaches,
    members_attended,
    actual_attendance
FROM view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu
WHERE DATE_TRUNC('week', session_date) = {{ table1.selectedRow.data.week_start }}
  AND session_type = {{ table1.selectedRow.data.session_type }}
  AND session_start = {{ table1.selectedRow.data.session_start }}
ORDER BY session_date, session_start;
```

See `retool_queries.md` for complete query examples.

---

## 🔄 Maintenance

### Adding New Class Types
1. Update `system_config` with new `capacity` and `max_*` values
2. Update trigger function `set_gym_and_class_type()` to recognize new patterns
3. Refresh views

### Adding New Gyms
1. Add new `max_*` columns to `system_config` if needed
2. Update trigger function to recognize new gym patterns
3. Update weekly view `CASE` statement for capacity selection
4. Refresh views

### Modifying Calculations
1. Update the relevant materialized view definition
2. Drop and recreate the view
3. Refresh the view to populate new calculations

---

## 📞 Support

For questions or issues:
1. Check the Retool queries documentation (`retool_queries.md`)
2. Verify view refresh status
3. Check `system_config` values are correct
4. Review trigger function logic for data enrichment

---

## 📅 Version History

- **v1.0** - Initial implementation with daily and weekly views
- **v1.1** - Added `gym` and `class_type` auto-population via trigger
- **v1.2** - Added gym-specific maximum capacity columns
- **v1.3** - Added `sale_without_change` and `sale_add_change` calculations

Commit message:

Update Data Sources section with table names and automatic tagging details

README.md, after:

# Attendance Tracking System

## 📊 Overview

These materialized views are designed to provide both sales and operations teams with insights into member attendance patterns, enabling informed decision-making around selling new memberships and capacity expansion opportunities.

**Live Dashboard:** [View Attendance Dashboard](https://lockeroomgym.retool.com/embedded/public/c5016a63-5e65-4265-88bd-5fc97296761b)

---

## 🔄 How Data Flows

```mermaid
flowchart TD
    A[Member Checks In] --> B[Daily Attendance Data]
    B --> C[Automatic Processing]
    C --> D[Daily View<br/>Individual Sessions]
    D --> E[Weekly View<br/>Aggregated Summary]
    E --> F[Retool Dashboard<br/>Business Insights]
    
    G[System Configuration<br/>Capacity Settings] --> C
    H[Gym Locations<br/>BLIGH, BRIDGE, COLLIN] --> C
    I[Class Types<br/>PERFORM, BOX, VO2, SQUAD] --> C
    
    style A fill:#e1f5ff
    style F fill:#d4edda
    style C fill:#fff3cd
    style E fill:#f8d7da
```

### Data Sources

1. **`member_daily_sessions_attended`**: Daily upload via CSV for the previous day's attendance data
2. **`system_config`**: Supabase table storing capacity limits and calculation parameters used in all calculations
3. **Gym Information**: Each class is automatically tagged with its location (BLIGH, BRIDGE, or COLLIN) on each upload via trigger function
4. **Class Types**: Classes are automatically categorized (PERFORM, BOX, VO2, SQUAD) on each upload via trigger function

> **Note:** These views are materialized views, meaning the data is pre-computed and stored for fast querying. The views refresh automatically via a scheduled cron job. Data will not update until the refresh automation runs at the scheduled time (every Tuesday at 1:00 AM).

---

## 📈 Key Metrics Explained

### Daily View Columns (`view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu`)

#### `session_date`, `session_start`, `session_type`
- **Source:** `member_daily_sessions_attended` table
- **Description:** Date, time, and full name of the class session

#### `gym`
- **Source:** Auto-populated by trigger function from `session_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Gym location (BLIGH, BRIDGE, or COLLIN)
- **Extraction Logic:** Pattern matching on `session_name` for "BRIDGE"/"BRG", "BLIGH"/"BLH", "COLLIN"/"COL"

#### `class_type`
- **Source:** Auto-populated by trigger function from `session_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Class category (PERFORM, BOX, VO2, SQUAD)
- **Extraction Logic:** Pattern matching on `session_name` for class type keywords

#### `coaches`
- **Source:** Aggregated from `coach_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Comma-separated list of all coaches for the session
- **Calculation:** `STRING_AGG(DISTINCT coach_name, ', ' ORDER BY coach_name)`

#### `members_attended`
- **Source:** Aggregated from `member_name` in `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Comma-separated list of all members who attended
- **Calculation:** `STRING_AGG(DISTINCT member_name, ', ' ORDER BY member_name)`

#### `actual_attendance`
- **Source:** Counted from `member_daily_sessions_attended`
- **Description:** Total number of members who attended the session
- **Calculation:** `COUNT(*)` grouped by session

#### `class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** `system_config.capacity` table, joined on `match_pattern = class_type`
- **Description:** Base capacity per class type (e.g., PERFORM = 2)
- **Calculation:** `MAX(sc.capacity)::int` where `sc.match_pattern = class_type`

#### `class_instance_capacity`
- **Source:** Calculated from `class_type_capacity` and number of coaches
- **Description:** Total capacity for this specific session instance (base capacity × number of coaches)
- **Calculation:** `class_type_capacity × (number_of_coaches)`
- **Coach Count:** Derived from counting distinct coaches in the aggregated `coaches` string

#### `max_class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** `system_config` table columns `max_bligh`, `max_bridge`, or `max_collin`
- **Description:** Gym-specific maximum capacity for this class type
- **Calculation:** 
  ```sql
  CASE 
      WHEN gym = 'BLIGH' THEN max_bligh
      WHEN gym = 'BRIDGE' THEN max_bridge
      WHEN gym = 'COLLIN' THEN max_collin
      ELSE capacity
  END
  ```
- **Source Table:** `system_config` joined on `match_pattern = class_type`

---

### Weekly View Columns (`view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu`)

#### `week_start`
- **Source:** Calculated from `session_date` in daily view
- **Description:** First day (Monday) of the week
- **Calculation:** `DATE_TRUNC('week', session_date)::date`

#### `session_type`, `session_start`, `gym`, `class_type`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view
- **Description:** Same as daily view, aggregated at weekly level

#### `class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view (originally from `system_config.capacity`)
- **Description:** Base capacity per class type
- **Calculation:** `MAX(class_type_capacity)` from daily view

#### `class_instance_capacity`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view
- **Description:** Capacity for the session instance (base × coaches)
- **Calculation:** `MAX(class_instance_capacity)` from daily view

#### `max_class_type_capacity`
- **Source:** Passed through from daily view (originally from `system_config.max_bligh/bridge/collin`)
- **Description:** Gym-specific maximum capacity
- **Calculation:** `MAX(max_class_type_capacity)` from daily view

#### `total_capacity_for_week`
- **Source:** Calculated from `class_instance_capacity` and `operational_days`
- **Description:** Total number of spots available across all operational days in the week
- **Calculation:** `class_instance_capacity × operational_days`
- **Formula:** `MAX(class_instance_capacity) × COUNT(DISTINCT session_date)`

#### `average_spots`
- **Source:** Calculated from `total_capacity_for_week` and `operational_days`
- **Description:** Average number of spots available per operational day
- **Calculation:** `total_capacity_for_week ÷ operational_days`
- **Formula:** `(class_instance_capacity × operational_days) ÷ operational_days`
- **Simplified:** `class_instance_capacity` (since capacity is constant per day)

#### `operational_days`
- **Source:** Counted from `session_date` in daily view
- **Description:** Number of days the class ran during the week (Monday-Friday only)
- **Calculation:** `COUNT(DISTINCT session_date)` where `EXTRACT(DOW FROM session_date) BETWEEN 1 AND 5`
- **Filter:** Only includes weekdays (Monday = 1, Friday = 5)

#### `total_attendance_for_week`
- **Source:** Summed from `actual_attendance` in daily view
- **Description:** Total number of members who attended across all sessions in the week
- **Calculation:** `SUM(actual_attendance)` from daily view

#### `avg_attendance_per_session`
- **Source:** Calculated from `total_attendance_for_week` and session count
- **Description:** Average number of attendees per individual session
- **Calculation:** `AVG(actual_attendance)` from daily view
- **Alternative:** `total_attendance_for_week ÷ number_of_sessions`

#### `utilization_rate`
- **Source:** Calculated from `total_attendance_for_week` and `total_capacity_for_week`
- **Description:** Ratio of actual attendance to available capacity (decimal format, 0.0 = empty, 1.0 = full capacity, >1.0 = over capacity)
- **Calculation:** `total_attendance_for_week ÷ total_capacity_for_week`
- **Formula:** `SUM(actual_attendance) ÷ (class_instance_capacity × operational_days)`
- **Range:** 0.0 to 1.0+ (can exceed 1.0 if over capacity)

#### `sale_without_change`
- **Source:** Calculated using `lc_buffer` and `avg_perform_consumption` from `system_config`, plus `utilization_rate` and `average_spots`
- **Description:** Estimated number of additional members that could be added without changing the current capacity setup
- **Calculation:** `((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) ÷ avg_perform_consumption`
- **Formula Breakdown:**
  - `lc_buffer`: Sourced from `system_config.config_value` where `config_key = 'lc_buffer'` (typically 0.9)
  - `utilization_rate`: Calculated column (see above)
  - `average_spots`: Calculated column (see above)
  - `avg_perform_consumption`: Sourced from `system_config.config_value` where `config_key = 'avg_perform_consumption'` (typically 0.4)
- **Logic:** Calculates available capacity buffer (target utilization minus current utilization) multiplied by average spots, then divided by consumption rate
- **Can be negative:** If `utilization_rate > lc_buffer`, result will be negative (over capacity)

#### `sale_add_change`
- **Source:** Calculated from `sale_without_change` and `max_class_type_capacity`
- **Description:** Estimated number of additional members that could be added if capacity is increased to the gym-specific maximum
- **Calculation:** `sale_without_change + max_class_type_capacity`
- **Formula:** `((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) ÷ avg_perform_consumption + max_class_type_capacity`
- **Source Columns:**
  - `sale_without_change`: Calculated column (see above)
  - `max_class_type_capacity`: Passed from daily view (originally from `system_config.max_bligh/bridge/collin`)

---

## 🔧 Technical Documentation

### System Architecture

```mermaid
graph TB
    subgraph "Source Data"
        A[member_daily_sessions_attended<br/>Raw attendance records]
        B[system_config<br/>Capacity & settings]
    end
    
    subgraph "Automated Processing"
        C[Trigger Function<br/>set_gym_and_class_type]
        D[Daily Materialized View<br/>view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu]
        E[Weekly Materialized View<br/>view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu]
    end
    
    subgraph "Output"
        F[Retool Dashboard]
    end
    
    A -->|INSERT/UPDATE| C
    C -->|Auto-populates| A
    A -->|Source data| D
    B -->|Config values| D
    D -->|Aggregates| E
    E -->|Queries| F
    
    style C fill:#ffeb3b
    style D fill:#4caf50
    style E fill:#2196f3
```

### Database Tables

#### `member_daily_sessions_attended`
Primary source table containing individual attendance records.

**Key Columns:**
- `session_date` - Date of the class
- `session_start` - Class start time
- `session_name` - Full class name (e.g., "PERFORM - BRG AM")
- `member_name` - Name of attending member
- `coach_name` - Name of coach
- `gym` - Auto-populated: BLIGH, BRIDGE, or COLLIN
- `class_type` - Auto-populated: PERFORM, BOX, VO2, or SQUAD

#### `system_config`
Configuration table storing capacity limits and calculation parameters.

**Key Configuration Values:**
- `capacity` - Base capacity per class type (e.g., PERFORM = 2)
- `max_bligh`, `max_bridge`, `max_collin` - Maximum capacity per gym location
- `lc_buffer` - Load capacity buffer (0.9 = 90% target)
- `avg_perform_consumption` - Average consumption rate for calculations (0.4)

### Materialized Views

#### `view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu` (Daily Detail)
Pre-aggregated daily view showing each session with:
- Aggregated member and coach lists
- Actual attendance count
- Class type capacity (base capacity from config)
- Class instance capacity (base × number of coaches)
- Maximum class type capacity (gym-specific max)

**Refresh:** Daily (or on-demand)

#### `view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu` (Weekly Aggregate)
Weekly summary aggregating Monday-Friday sessions:

**Columns:**
- `week_start` - First day of the week
- `session_type` - Class name
- `session_start` - Class time
- `gym` - Location
- `class_type` - Category
- `class_type_capacity` - Base capacity
- `class_instance_capacity` - Capacity × coaches
- `max_class_type_capacity` - Gym-specific maximum
- `total_capacity_for_week` - Total spots available for the week
- `average_spots` - Average spots per day
- `operational_days` - Number of days class ran (Mon-Fri)
- `total_attendance_for_week` - Total members attended
- `avg_attendance_per_session` - Average per session
- `utilization_rate` - Ratio of attendance to capacity (0.0-1.0+)
- `sale_without_change` - `((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) / avg_perform_consumption`
- `sale_add_change` - `sale_without_change + max_class_type_capacity`

**Refresh:** Daily (or on-demand)

### Automated Functions

#### `set_gym_and_class_type()`
**Type:** Trigger Function (PL/pgSQL)  
**Trigger:** `trigger_set_gym_and_class_type`  
**When:** Before INSERT or UPDATE on `member_daily_sessions_attended`

**Purpose:** Automatically extracts gym location and class type from `session_name`:
- **Gym Detection:** Looks for "BRIDGE"/"BRG", "BLIGH"/"BLH", "COLLIN"/"COL"
- **Class Type Detection:** Looks for "PERFORM", "BOX", "VO2", "SQUAD"
- **Case Insensitive:** Handles variations in capitalization

**Example:**
- Input: `session_name = "PERFORM - BRG AM"`
- Output: `gym = "BRIDGE"`, `class_type = "PERFORM"`

#### `refresh_view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu()`
**Type:** Function  
**Purpose:** Refreshes the daily materialized view

#### `refresh_view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu()`
**Type:** Function  
**Purpose:** Refreshes the weekly materialized view

### Calculation Formulas

#### Utilization Rate
```
utilization_rate = total_attendance_for_week / total_capacity_for_week
```
- Range: 0.0 (empty) to 1.0+ (over capacity)
- Example: 15 attendees / 18 capacity = 0.833 (83.3% full)

#### Sale Without Change
```
sale_without_change = ((lc_buffer - utilization_rate) × average_spots) / avg_perform_consumption
```
- Shows how many more members can be added without changing capacity
- Uses buffer (0.9) as target utilization
- Example: ((0.9 - 0.833) × 6.0) / 0.4 = 1.0

#### Sale Add Change
```
sale_add_change = sale_without_change + max_class_type_capacity
```
- Shows potential if capacity is increased to maximum
- Example: 1.0 + 8 = 9.0

### Data Flow Details

1. **Data Entry**: Attendance records are inserted into `member_daily_sessions_attended`
2. **Auto-Enrichment**: Trigger function automatically populates `gym` and `class_type` columns
3. **Daily Aggregation**: Daily view groups sessions by date, time, and location
4. **Weekly Aggregation**: Weekly view aggregates Monday-Friday data by week
5. **Configuration Lookup**: Views join with `system_config` to get capacity settings
6. **Calculation**: All metrics are calculated in real-time during view refresh

### Refresh Schedule

**Automated:** Weekly on Tuesday at 1:00 AM
- Cron job name: `refresh_attendance_views_weekly`
- Refreshes both daily and weekly views automatically
- Can also be triggered manually via Retool

**Manual Refresh:**
```sql
SELECT refresh_view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu();
SELECT refresh_view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu();
```

### Indexes

**Daily View:**
- `idx_daily_attendance_date` on `session_date DESC`
- `idx_daily_attendance_composite` on `(session_date DESC, session_start, session_type)`

**Weekly View:**
- `idx_weekly_attendance_week_start` on `week_start DESC`
- `idx_weekly_attendance_session_type` on `session_type`
- `idx_weekly_attendance_composite` on `(week_start DESC, session_type, session_start)`

### Filtering Logic

**Weekly View Filter:**
- Only includes Monday-Friday: `EXTRACT(DOW FROM session_date) BETWEEN 1 AND 5`
- Groups by week using `DATE_TRUNC('week', session_date)`
- Currently filters for PERFORM classes only (can be expanded)

### Error Handling

- **Division by Zero**: All division operations check for zero denominators
- **NULL Values**: Config values are checked for NULL before use
- **Missing Data**: Views handle missing gym/class_type gracefully (returns NULL)

---

## 📝 Usage in Retool

### Primary Table Query
Use the weekly view as your main dashboard table:

```sql
SELECT 
    week_start,
    session_type,
    session_start,
    gym,
    class_type,
    utilization_rate,
    sale_without_change,
    sale_add_change
FROM view_attendance_weekly_26_mvp_csu
ORDER BY week_start DESC, session_start;
```

### Drill-Down Query
When clicking a weekly row, show daily details:

```sql
SELECT 
    session_date,
    session_start,
    session_type,
    coaches,
    members_attended,
    actual_attendance
FROM view_data_attendance_26_mvp_csu
WHERE DATE_TRUNC('week', session_date) = {{ table1.selectedRow.data.week_start }}
  AND session_type = {{ table1.selectedRow.data.session_type }}
  AND session_start = {{ table1.selectedRow.data.session_start }}
ORDER BY session_date, session_start;
```

See `retool_queries.md` for complete query examples.

---

## 🔄 Maintenance

### Adding New Class Types
1. Update `system_config` with new `capacity` and `max_*` values
2. Update trigger function `set_gym_and_class_type()` to recognize new patterns
3. Refresh views

### Adding New Gyms
1. Add new `max_*` columns to `system_config` if needed
2. Update trigger function to recognize new gym patterns
3. Update weekly view `CASE` statement for capacity selection
4. Refresh views

### Modifying Calculations
1. Update the relevant materialized view definition
2. Drop and recreate the view
3. Refresh the view to populate new calculations

---

## 📞 Support

For questions or issues:
1. Check the Retool queries documentation (`retool_queries.md`)
2. Verify view refresh status
3. Check `system_config` values are correct
4. Review trigger function logic for data enrichment

---

## 📅 Version History

- **v1.0** - Initial implementation with daily and weekly views
- **v1.1** - Added `gym` and `class_type` auto-population via trigger
- **v1.2** - Added gym-specific maximum capacity columns
- **v1.3** - Added `sale_without_change` and `sale_add_change` calculations
